in evening ah my my name is uh well you
know who I am
Wow most people are not funny doesn't
mean they're bad people or dumb or
unperceptive or even uncreated
just like most people can't play violin
or play professional level basketball or
perform brain surgery or a million other
vocational technical aesthetic or
creative pursuits everyone is created
unequal but for some reason everyone
wants to be funny and feels like they
have a right to be funny but being funny
is like any other Talent some people are
born with it and then through diligence
and hard work and a lot of mistakes they
strengthen that talent Patton Oswalt one
of my all-time favorite comedians wrote
that on this blog back in 2013 as a
lifelong comedy nerd I find it hard not
to agree with them not only does being
funny require a baseline sense of humor
but showmanship a keen sense of the
relationship between language and comedy
countless hours writing and rewriting
and a willingness to fail everyone in
the comedy world knows it's very serious
work while most of the public sees only
the comedian's who have made it to the
top playing theaters and arenas
countless other comedians put their life
into getting a chance on the club
circuit most comedians openly admit that
they are addicted to the rush of getting
laughs there's nothing like hearing a
roomful of laughter at your command it's
an occupation that has the possibility
for riches and fame and therefore it's
tempting to cut corners this is where
jokes theft becomes a problem joke
stealing is as taboo as it gets in the
comedy community just take for example
the controversy between Lucy Kay and
Dane Cook it nearly destroyed Cook's
career I want to look at a couple of
cases like theirs and breakdown comedy
as it relates to originality and
intellectual property let's start with a
side-by-side comparison of jokes by Lucy
Kay and Dane Cook about naming children
here's Louie's bed my wife and I were
thinking having a baby and I like to
have a kid because you can name your kid
anything you want I like that part
I'd like to get my kid an interesting
name you know like a name with no vowels
maybe you know just like Putin surely do
note the prin just like 40 FS that's his
name
go clean your room you know something No
and here's Danes bed I think about
having god I'd love to have some kids
I don't thinking about kids I wanna have
like 19 kids
I think naming them that's gonna be fun
whatever the names that you come up with
that's exciting right there you get to
both decide hey you want to name that
none like that name right it's like a
little game you try to come on I already
have names picked out I don't even know
first kid boy girl I don't care the
first one that comes out I'm naming it I
think it's beautiful its feminine but
strong at the same time time for bed hmm
I said time for bed no cookies
typical seeking cook are only five years
apart in age they both grew up in Boston
and started their comedy careers there
CK's version of the joke preceded cooks
by four years this is all circumstantial
evidence but it's indicative of the
evidence others lay out when convicting
a comedian of joke theft
there's hearsay theirs apocryphal
stories of one comedian watching another
set and surp digitally writing down
jokes if they've ever been in the same
room together ever that's considered
damning evidence so let's start by
admitting that most controversies over
joke theft are plagued by speculation
personal score settling and the
influence of accuser and accused
comedians are highly protective and
vigilant when it comes to their own
material and they need to be but with
1001 notions of similarity versus
plagiarism influence versus theft and
property right versus free culture it's
no wonder dialogue about joke theft
lacks the requisite structure for a
satisfying resolution did Dane Cook
steal from louis c.k it's hard to decide
both jokes cover the same topic of
naming children both jokes use a similar
punchline about nonsensical names both
comedians proposed a name with a single
letter CK chooses the letter F and Cook
chooses R but C can cook are both
observational comedians and it's not
impossible that they independently
thought about the humor of naming
children that they both chose a similar
punchline though is suspect there are
always other punchlines available the
joke first appears on CK's 2001 album
live in Houston while Cooke doesn't tell
his version until his 2005 platinum
album retaliation but it's unfair to
imply that simply because CK's version
predated cooks cook must have stolen the
joke a search on YouTube for naming
children comedy yields dozens of jokes
with a similar premise including one by
Steve Martin it's more likely that
several comedians saw the comedic
potential in the subject of naming
children than that they all stole from
CK I must admit to that there's sort of
a gut feeling that goes along with
making a judgment to that gut feeling is
an amalgam of a lot of things
familiarity with a comic style the
comics on and off stage persona is known
influences and my preference
the comic if I dislike them I'm more
inclined to label them as a thief kook
and CK addressed the joke stealing
controversy together on an episode of
Louie in 2011 both comedians end up
making good points and CK is willing to
write off the theft as Krypton IVA
krypton IVA occurs when a forgotten
memory returns without it being
recognized as such by the subject who
believes it is something new and
original it is a memory bias whereby a
person may falsely recall generating a
thought an idea a song or a joke not
deliberately engaging in plagiarism but
rather experiencing a memory as if it
were new inspiration in other words you
tell your friend you have a great new
idea for a startup and they say I told
you that idea two weeks ago you may
believe with absolute certainty you
thought of it but you actually had a
lapse in memory I think you saw me do
them I know you saw me do them and I
think they just went in your brain and I
don't think you meant to do it but I
don't think you stopped yourself either
in 1989 psychologists Alan Brown and
Dana Murphy conducted several
experiments on Krypton IVA
in the first session test participants
were asked to come up with ideas they
had to brainstorm about solutions to
complex problems together such as a
medical diagnosis during the second
session several weeks later they
indicated what their contribution was on
the previous occasion and in a third and
final session they were challenged to
come up with ideas that had not been
proposed before about 9% of the total
responses were plagiarized from others
in the group famous psychiatrist Carl
Jung claimed Krypton IVA is not only a
normal mental process but a necessary
one as well if it were not for this
process the human mind would always be
cluttered or overloaded with random
information but plagiarism is still
plagiarism even if it was done
unwittingly and Krypton IVA can get
anyone in serious trouble the type of
trouble however is a little different
with jokes they aren't protected by
copyright law like the works of
musicians so most comics don't have the
proper legislative infrastructure to
protect their material so Krypton Asia
turns out to be the last resort in the
situation where the comic denies
stealing and the other side refuses to
accept his
eyal it's the middle ground where both
sides get what they want the accusers
get confirmation that the comics stole
but the comic can use a psychological
scapegoat to abdicate responsibility it
just shows the treacherous speculation
armchair probability and pop psychology
that governs these controversies and
indeed there's some plausible
deniability in a lot of cases
unlike observational humor topical humor
is bound to cause some overlap between
comics listen to the opening monologues
of several late night hosts in a row and
you'll hear the same topics the same set
up and sometimes the same punchline and
the internet greatly increases the
probability of Krypton Eva funny jokes
are constantly shared and as their likes
increase so does their visibility and
the likelihood that famous comedians and
everyday people store those jokes in
their unconscious a few days later they
may think it was an original joke of
their own with all these arguments in
mind listen to this side-by-side
comparison of Bill Cosby and Carlos
Mencia telling jokes about fathers
raising football stars you say come here
boy two years old you say get down dad
show you how to do it now you come at me
run through me see get back up get back
up see you didn't do it right now come
at me
see now you teach him see you say now go
attack that tree bite it ha ha ha come
on back why did he get a I teach him all
that tackle me Pam and then soon he's
bigger and he's stronger and he can hit
you and you don't want him hit you
anymore you say alright son turn him
loose on high school he's running up and
down the field High School touchdown
he's under touchdowns for games yes
that's my son and he goes to the big
college playing for big school three
million students and 800,000 people in
the stand
national TV and he catches the ball and
he doesn't even bother to get out of the
way just runs over everybody
for a TD and turn around and the cameras
on him and you looking at he says hi mom
he gives him a football and he shows him
how to pass it he shows him every day
how to pass that football ha 3 step 5
step 7 step drop he shows him how to
throw the bomb how to throw the out how
to throw the hook how to throw the
corner he shows this little kid
everything that he needs to know about
how to be a great quarterback he even
moves from one city to the other so that
kid could be in a better high school
then that kid goes to college and that
man is still every single game that dad
is right there and he's in college
getting better he wins a Heisman Trophy
he ends up in the NFL five years later
he ends up in the Super Bowl they win
the Super Bowl
he gets the MVP of the Super Bowl and
when the cameras come up to him and say
you got anything to say to the camera I
love you mom in an interview on Marc
Maron's podcast WTF Mencia claims that
he never had heard the Cosby joke until
people accused him of stealing and that
the similarities between the two
versions were entirely coincidental no
way it's not just the topic it's the way
Mencia matches the pacing uses the same
intonation and ends with the same
punchline Maron gives him the same out
that CK gave to Dane Cook right
sometimes people just got sponge brains
and their brains are working really
quick so you all of a sudden you see a
bit that you think is funny and then you
add a couple tags to it in your head and
a few days later you don't remember that
you saw the bit you just remember what
you added to it and it's your bit if
Mencia is unwilling to admit he
purposefully stole the joke then the
comedy community will accept the next
best confession that he unwittingly
stole the joke as long as one way or
another they receive confirmation that
he is not the creator of that joke and
les does not have the right to tell it
I've had a hard time grappling with this
idea of krypton Eva from one perspective
it's very useful as humans we evolved to
cooperate in tribes group problem
solving was paramount recalling exactly
who came up with an idea is not as
important as recalling what that
valuable idea was perhaps as the blog
brain pickings puts it this is the fate
of creativity and has always been a part
of its essential nature but we live in a
capitalist economy that is far more
individualistic than our ancestors was
the only way to survive is to work hard
and hope that it pays off if everyone is
allowed to steal everyone else's idea
the willingness to work hard disappears
so maybe we've always subconsciously
stolen and nothing has really ever
created so much as edited but how do we
reconcile the plausible evolutionary
importance of Krypton IVA with the
thieves that take advantage of
hard-working creative people in a piece
by Javier griot marxuach titled I am a
fucking plagiarist
he writes there's plagiarists and then
there's fucking plagiarists the former
plagiarized by accident or at least
claim to with plausible deniability the
latter did it on purpose they know damn
well they did it and they'll deploy all
the same arguments as the former to make
sure you never know it maybe then
everyone suffers from Krypton Eva to an
extent yet they remain the fucking
plagiarists those who selfishly and
actively steal from others so maybe Dane
Cook is a plagiarist but who isn't
Mencia on the other hand is a fucking
plagiarist in stand up a comedian has an
idea maybe writes it down maybe not
performs it on stage multiple times
changing the phrasing or its order in
the routine and the joke vanishes into
thin air until it's recorded or
performed again a joke doesn't have the
tangible quality of a piece of writing
which makes it so much harder to police
and I'm not necessarily lobbying for
copywriting jokes in fact it feels dirty
somehow having an encircled see next to
a punchline so I think what becomes
paramount in all of this is respect
that's the story of my life don't
respect I don't get no respect at all
it's something Oswald has fought for in
comedy for a long time I care about the
continued false perception the bulk of
the general public has about stand-up
comedy he writes and what I care about
most of all is the maddening false
perceptions that the other people in the
creative arts have about stand-up
comedians don't write their own jokes
they all steal all great artists steal
you can't copyright jokes it doesn't
matter who writes a joke just who tells
it best
don't musicians play other musicians
songs there are only so many subjects to
make jokes about anyway I've seen like
five different comedians do jokes about
airplanes isn't that stealing - there's
too much to refute in these lines so
I'll just turn to what Oswalt feels is
the core of the problem everyone wants
to be funny
sure but the problem is everyone feels
like they have a right to be funny but
it's not a right it's
skill one that requires crafting and
hard work you don't have a right to be
funny just like you don't have a right
to be a violinist the problem is while
you can't just pick up a violin and
sound like a virtuoso you can steal a
joke and sound like a comedian the only
way to discourage people from doing so
argues Oswalt is to underscore the fact
that stand-up is a creative pursuit an
art form that deserves the same respect
and regulation as others in closing I'll
say this one of my favorite philosophers
Ludwig Wittgenstein believed that the
most serious and profound problems and
questions and issues could be discussed
only in the form of jokes and I think
the least we could do is show an
unwavering respect for the creative
hard-working people who present us with
big ideas and make us laugh their main
goal in life is to help people feel a
little happier and if that isn't an
honorable purpose I don't know what is
[Music]
hey everyone this was my last video of
2016 so I just wanted to say thank you
to all of my subscribers for helping
this channel grow in the last year you
guys have been awesome and I also want
to thank my patrons over on patreon you
guys have kept this channel going and
you're the reason why I can spend so
much time trying to make good content so
if you appreciate what I do here and
you're not a patron I would love for you
to become one you guys really make this
channel happen other than that I will
see you in 2017